this is Wendover productions sponsored
by the great courses plus here's an
interesting question which city do you
think is more dense Paris France
or New York United States it probably
seems obvious New York the land of
skyscrapers the Big Apple
right wrong New York in fact has a
population density of less than half
that of Paris
Paris's is 56,000 people per square mile
while New York's is only 27,000 people
per square mile to find a European city
with a comparable population density to
New York's the densest American city you
have to go all the way down to number 6
on the list Leon France New York of
course has a super dense urban core but
then around it is miles and miles of
suburbia just like almost every other
American city Paris on the other hand
packs almost its entire population into
a compact urban core
there's also another interesting pattern
that differs between the two continents
rich Americans live outside the city
rich Europeans live city centre compare
the income map of Paris to that of
Philadelphia of course it's not perfect
but you can definitely see a pattern the
most commonly cited reason for both
these trends is the difference in age
most European cities have existed for
hundreds if not thousands of years while
all but a few American cities have only
gathered enough population to be called
cities in the past one or two hundred
years what that means is that European
cities existed when all but the
super-rich had to commute to work by
foot in the Middle Ages Paris had a
population of two to three hundred
thousand people but you could walk from
one side to the other in 30 minutes
it was incredibly densely populated you
just had to live within walking distance
of work therefore the rich paid more for
the houses closest to the center of the
city this is a similar reason to why an
historic European hotels you'll often
see the nicest and largest rooms on the
lower floors the opposite of what you'd
see today before elevators existed
the rich didn't want to have to walk up
as many flights of stairs walking
distance was not only important to big
cities
all villages across Europe were almost
always the same size because their
population was dictated by the
walkability of the surrounding fields
European farmers tended to live in small
towns and walk to their fields during
the day rather than the home setting
approach used in America
therefore villages would only be as
large as the amount of people needed to
work in the fields within walking
distance American cities on the other
hand began their period of rapid growth
in a more modern era when decentralizing
technologies were much more advanced by
the time North American cities grew
larger than the distance people could
reasonably walk there was already the
technological capability to create
public transportation systems the first
major public transportation innovation
was this steam train in the mid
nineteenth century this was a very
expensive means of transport and was
therefore only for the super-rich
interestingly because steam trains take
an enormous amount of time to reach
speed the towns of the rich commuted
from known as railroad suburbs were
generally not just at the nearest bit of
countryside but separated from the city
by a few miles of countryside the impact
of railroad suburbs remains today on the
tracks of the old Philadelphia mainline
there's a stretch of super-rich
communities with huge estates and
country clubs from Ardmore to Malvern
the demographics just never change from
the time of the railroad suburb a few
decades later streetcars emerge and
quickly became an instrumental part of
the American commute much like steam
trains streetcars also created new
communities this time with slightly less
rich upper-middle class individuals in
Washington DC the wealthy suburbs of
Tenleytown Chevy Chase Bethesda McLean
Rockville and more all grew as a result
of the streetcar but once again walking
distance influenced geography streetcar
commuters had to live within walking
distance of a stop so naturally there
would be a radius of civilization around
20 or 30 minutes walking distance from a
stop then pass that nothing that meant
that between the lines there was all
this open space where nobody could
commute from enter the automobile at
first the car was only for upper-class
individual
especially with the distraction of the
two world wars and great depression
however by the time young Americans
returned from World War two there had
been enough technological advances to
make the automobile affordable for the
middle class over fifty percent of
household tech cars by 1950 at the same
time the government was offering loans
to returning veterans which
significantly increased the number of
Americans who could afford to buy homes
instead of buying a small central city
home
this generation opted to use their new
cars to commute from cheaper nicer and
larger suburban homes the idea was that
the working parents would go downtown
each day while the rest of the family
would stay to enjoy the suburb it was
the perfect deal so that whole history
was absolutely true but it doesn't
entirely explained why European cities
didn't experience suburbanization as
well in Germany for example many if not
most cities were bombed to rubble during
World War two they had the opportunity
to rebuild in any way they wanted but
then chose to keep their compact design
today the average metropolitan
population density in Germany is four
times higher than the u.s. at the same
time other cities across Europe that
survived the war experienced enormous
population in fluxes and still maintain
their mammoth population densities
perhaps the least commonly cited reason
for suburbanization in the u.s. is crime
it's a bit of an ugly period in American
history that we sometimes forget but
crime levels were absolutely insane in
the 70s 80s and 90s there are a ton of
different theories why this is perhaps
the most interesting being that the rise
in gasoline emitted lead caused lower
IQs and higher aggressivity New York had
an astronomical 2245 murders in 1990
London didn't even have that many in the
entire 90s decade violent crime rates
are still consistently 10 or more times
higher in the u.s. in 1992 a poll was
conducted asking departing New Yorkers
why they were moving to the suburbs and
the most commonly cited reason was crime
at 47 % cost and quality of living were
way down at lower than 10
sent each crime rates are significantly
lower in suburbs as they are typically
havens for higher income individuals
Europeans don't have to worry as much
about intercity crime so they're much
more willing to live downtown land for
suburban housing is also readily
available in the US because farmers have
always been quick to sell the relatively
unprofitable land to developers by
contrast in France for example
agricultural subsidies are 12 times
higher per acre of land than the u.s.
that's a big reason why large european
cities are so closely surrounded by
small farms in many european cities you
can literally take the city bus to farms
lastly all sorts of energy are cheaper
in the u.s. a gallon of gas costs as
much as seven dollars in some parts of
Europe compared to the u.s. average of
two dollars and 20 cents it's
significantly more expensive to commute
by car in Europe so there's a more
motivation to live closer to work where
either the drive is shorter or you can
take public transportation also big
suburban homes aren't as attractive in
Europe because electricity and heating
costs are higher suburban life really
didn't live up to expectations Americans
now spend an average of four and a
quarter hours per week sitting in cars
buses or trains traveling to or from
work that's two and a half percent of
their entire lives
it's also been scientifically proven
that commuting from the suburbs is
linked to higher blood pressure lower
frustration tolerance and higher rates
of anxiety also the suburbs are no
longer the countryside havens that they
once were they're just a continuation of
the urban sprawl rich Americans are
therefore beginning to return to the
city with lower crime rates higher fuel
costs and an overall shift in attitude
urban cores are having a second
Renaissance
so that's why we live where we do it's a
complicated controversial and
surprisingly political history I hope
you enjoyed this window reproductions
video I first need to thank my amazing
sponsor the great courses plus the great
courses plus is a subscription on-demand
video learning service where you can
watch on
limited top-notch courses from Ivy
League professors National Geographic
scientists Culinary Institute of America
chefs and hundreds more highly qualified
individuals if you enjoyed this video I
highly recommend the course on cultural
and human geography it's a super
interesting topic and this course
absolutely does it justice you can watch
this or any other of the hundreds of
courses for free when you sign up for a
30-day free trial using the link ww a
great courses plus comm slash Wendover
or the link is also in the description I
also recently started a patreon which
you can go to by clicking here there are
a bunch of great rewards like early
access to videos stickers t-shirts and
best of all every dollar contributed
there goes right back into the channel
aside from that please follow me on
twitter at 1-over pro watch my last
video on the story behind the 787 and
a380 planes check out my fan moderated
subreddit at wwe.com slash window
reproductions and most of all subscribe
to this channel thanks again for
watching and I'll see you in two weeks
for another one / productions video
[Music]